6.0 Alternative Analysis
========================

6.1 Alternative Development Process
-----------------------------------

An Alternative Analysis was completed to develop flood mitigation
solutions for the problem areas identified in the previous section.
Goals for mitigation focused on at a minimum providing storm drainage
capacity meeting currently defined drainage criteria for the Town of
Lyons and solutions to reducing flooding on insurable structures.
Consideration was also given to reducing infrastructure sizing and costs
by incorporating detention.

Alternatives were considered first for open channel and then for piped
systems. Open channels are more cost effective, provide additional
ecological benefits, mimic or sometimes restore the natural environment,
but require additional stabilization and maintenance to provide long
term benefits. Piped systems are far more hydraulically efficient and
allow for more flexible land uses in and around the system, but do not
benefit the natural environment and can be significantly more costly to
install, particularly in underlying rock soils.

For example, the development of downtown Lyons over the historic
drainageway has limited the ability to convey the major storm events
through an open channel system. Since an open channel system is not
feasible, large storm drain infrastructure is needed to reduce the flood
hazards throughout the study area. The storm drain infrastructure must
limit the amount of flow in the street to provide emergency vehicles
access during storm events.

The analysis aimed to develop stormwater solutions first within the Town
of Lyons. When those alternatives were exhausted as cost prohibitive or
unfeasible, then the project team considered alternatives outside of the
Town limits. The cost of land acquisition, land use regulations, and
extra-territorial jurisdiction can add significant costs to stormwater
projects outside of the Town limits. Conversely, knowing about potential
out of town solutions to in-town risks can be prudent to future planning
exercises in annexation, development referrals, and multi-agency
coordination.

6.2 Criteria and Constraints
----------------------------

As noted above, goals for the baseline alternative plan was to provide
storm drainage capacity to meeting currently defined drainage criteria
set forth in the Town of Lyons Storm Drainage System Criteria. The minor
storm frequency for the Town of Lyons is the 2-yr design storm with the
100-yr design storm classified as the major storm frequency.

6.3 Evaluation of Detention
---------------------------

#### 6.3.1 Detention

Detention is a common approach to reduce peak flows, optimize pipe size,
and save on downstream infrastructure costs. Review of the previous
master plan confirmed that previously master planned detention
facilities were drafted to meet this goal. If detention is installed in
the upper watersheds of the Town, there is a significant cost savings to
downstream stormwater infrastructure. However, upon closer examination
of the previous master plan assumptions, field inspection of the
proposed detention sites, and conceptual pond grading and layout there
were additional constraints on the detention pond locations.

#### 6.3.2 Steep Topography

The steep slopes on the north end of Steamboat drainage require
significant grading operations to achieve a functional detention volume
even approaching 0.5 acre feet. This fact alone may still be a viable
alternative since excavation is generally less expensive than long
lengths of large storm sewer pipe material, utility crossings, and
installation. However, given the geology of the upper Steamboat drainage
the depth to bedrock is known to be very shallow in many locations. Rock
excavation for a detention facility is prohibitively expensive.
Excavation of the rock in a quarry scenario would be one economically
viable means of providing sufficient detention volume at a reasonable
cost for Steamboat drainage.

#### 6.3.3 Multiple Hillside Ponds

Staged detention facilities staggered in stair-step fashion up the steep
slopes is another alternative to achieve the benefits of detention
without significant excavation. However, the extensive footprint of
disturbance for multiple embankments, overflow spillway design, and
permanent impact on property makes

#### 6.3.4 Property Acquisition

The natural valleys between 4<sup>th</sup> and 5<sup>th</sup> Streets
and 3<sup>rd</sup> and 4<sup>th</sup> Streets could provide suitable
detention facilities if several existing constraints are mitigated.
First, the private homes in the adjacent parcels would be impacted by
detention depths of more than approximately 5 feet. Purchase and
demolition of homes affected by a proposed detention facility would be
required to achieve a useful detention volume. Second, the existing
embankments between 4<sup>th</sup> and 5<sup>th</sup> Street should be
reconstructed to replace the rock and native soils that were used to
build what is reported to be an old railroad embankment. Until the
compaction and stability of that embankment can be verified, it should
not be relied upon to safely detain stormwater. It is unclear what the
overflow path may be should the outlet under the embankment fail,
collapse or clog. However it is likely the overflow could lead to
additional erosion and scour of the embankment flanks and expedite
complete failure of the embankment. Third, the valleys near the cemetery
are also candidates for detention, but the steep slopes make each valley
individually difficult to achieve a reasonable volume. However, purchase
of a uniquely shaped parcel of land slicing between the valleys could
allow an embankment to be constructed that joins the two valleys and
creates a reasonable detention volume.

6.4 Alternative Categories
--------------------------

For each outfall system, multiple alternatives were evaluated in the
initial screening process including:

-   Improve storm drain infrastructure to convey minor storm runoff

-   Improve storm drain infrastructure to the initial storm, and provide
    detention facilities to reduce infrastructure costs where applicable

-   Improve storm drain infrastructure to the major storm runoff.

-   Improve storm drain infrastructure to the major storm, and provide
    detention facilities to reduce infrastructure costs where applicable

6.5 Alternative Hydraulics
--------------------------

Each alternative was modeled using SWMM to determine the pipe sizes
necessary to meet the desired alternative criteria. The reduction in
flooding potential throughout the basin was evaluated for the minor and
major design storm frequencies using FLO-2D.

6.6 Alternative Costs
-----------------

Alternative cost estimates were developed using UDFCDâ€™s master planning cost estimating spreadsheet UD-MP COST, version 2.2. 2012 unit cost values were adjusted to present value using the Colorado Construction Cost Index 2016 Second Quarter Report. A rolling four-quarter inflation rate of 1.2673 was used to adjust unit costs.

Operation and Maintenance was also included within the UD MP Cost worksheet. Manhole and inlet maintenance was assumed to occur once every five years. Maintenance on detention basins and water quality facilities was assumed to occur every other year.

Inlet quantities were calculated assuming an inlet interception capacity of 1 cfs / foot of inlet.

Dewatering, Traffic Control and Utility Coordination / Relocation were assigned based on the following percentages of capital costs: Dewatering (1%), Traffic Control (5%), Utility Coordination / Relocation (10%).

Special items that were added to the UD-MP COST spreadsheet include:

- Asphalt Repaving: \$40 / S.Y.

- Curb and Gutter: \$30 / L.F.

No alterations were made to default values calculated as a percent of Capital Improvement Costs, such as Engineering, Legal/Administrative, Contract Administration/Construction Management, and Contingency.

6.7 Alternative Plans
-----------------

#### 6.7.1 Red Hill Gulch Overflow Channel

Any flow that exceeds the capacity of the South Ledge Ditch poses a
flooding hazard to Lyons Valley Subdivision and Bohn Park. This
uncontrolled spill flow risks the structural integrity of the ditch and
poses a hazard to homes along the west side of Lyons Valley Park. The
Red Hill Gulch Overflow Channel would intercept flows along the east
side of Bohn Park preventing these flows from diverting into the Lyons
Valley Park Subdivision. The grading associated with the overflow
channel should limit any disturbance to Bohn Park to the maximum extent
possible. When the Western Corridor is annexed into the Town of Lyons
the overflow channel alignment should be evaluated to intercept the
flows upstream of Bohn Park eliminating any disturbance to the park. The
flows would be conveyed west of Bohn Park and discharged into South St.
Vrain Creek.

#### 6.7.2 Red Hill Gulch Diversion Channel

To prevent the comingling of stormwater and irrigation flows a diversion
channel is proposed to convey the flows west to South St. Vrain Creek.
The formalized conveyance of Red Hill Gulch would intercept flows just
upstream of South Ledge Ditch to South St. Vrain Creek. Although this
area is not currently within the town limits and is privately owned,
this alternative should be further evaluated as redevelopment occurs
when the Western Corridor is annexed into the Town of Lyons. This
alternative would protect the structural integrity of the South Ledge
Ditch by eliminating any spill from and canal that could become a
flooding hazard to Bohn Park or the Lyons Valley Park Subdivision.

#### 6.7.3 Steamboat Drainage Culvert Replacement

To reduce flooding within the Steamboat Valley Watershed, the existing
historic box culvert could be upsized to convey the design discharge.
Upsizing the existing historic box culvert along the current alignment
between 4th and 5th Avenue would encourage the runoff from the watershed
to follow the historic drainage path. However, implementing this
alternative would require extensive easements as the historic culvert
runs through the downtown area underneath development on private
properties.

#### 6.7.4 Steamboat Drainage Interceptors

Downstream of the private railroad embankment an interceptor system
could be installed to collect flow at the McCall Alley roadway crossing.
Flows in excess of the existing channel and roadway crossings would be
intercepted and conveyed west to 5th Avenue. The storm drain system
would continue south to North St. Vrain Creek. Intercepting the flow at
McCall Alley would alleviate the flooding on properties downstream by
limiting the flow to the existing infrastructure capacity.

For further protection, an additional lateral could be installed up 5th
Avenue to the drainage roadway crossing at Vasquez Road. The lateral up
to Vasquez Road would intercept flows upstream of the private detention
area, reducing the risk on downstream properties if the embankment was
to fail.

A storm drain system could be installed in 4th Avenue in the lower
portions of the Steamboat Valley Watershed to intercept local runoff and
convey the discharge to the North St. Vrain Creek. This additional storm
drain system would alleviate some of the existing flooding hazard on
properties in the downtown area.

#### 6.7.5 Third Avenue Inlets and Storm Drain

To mitigate flood hazards associated with the Third Avenue Watershed, a
storm drain is proposed from the upper reaches from Third Avenue east of
the cemetery downstream to the North St. Vrain Creek. A lateral along
Stickney Avenue would intercept the flows from the undeveloped northeast
portion of the watershed that drains southwest into the downtown area.
Continuing the storm drain system south of Main Street would alleviate
some of the burden of the South 2nd Avenue Watershed. Any flows in
excess of the existing storm drain in the Third Avenue Watershed
currently spill in the South 2nd Avenue Watershed.

#### 6.7.6 Eastern Lyons 

Recent development within the Eastern Lyons watershed has increased the
runoff from the hillside causing local flooding problems. For larger
events the existing roadway conveyance and roadside swale along 2nd
Avenue does not adequately convey the runoff south along 2nd Avenue
instead diverting flow to the west into the Third Avenue Watershed.
Formalizing the street conveyance by installing curb and gutters and
cross pans in 2nd Avenue would encourage runoff from this watershed to
continue south along 2nd Avenue and not impact properties the Third
Avenue Watershed.

#### 6.7.7 Eastern Lyons - Second Avenue Inlets and Storm Sewer

To ensure no runoff diverts from the Eastern Lyons Watershed, inlets and
a storm drain pipe can be installed along 2nd Avenue. The storm drain
inlets and pipe in combination with curb and gutter would intercept the
flow and convey the flow south to Main Street.

#### 6.7.8 Lyons Valley Inlet Improvements

Runoff from the upper portions of the subwatershed sheet flows in a
general northeast direction through the subdivision to St. Vrain Creek.
The storm drain infrastructure installed with the development of Lyons
Valley Park Subdivision is a minor drainage system and lacks capacity to
convey major storm events.

#### 6.7.9 Lyons Valley South Ditch Improvements

The South Ledge Ditch located south of Lyons Valley Park Subdivision
intercepts runoff from the subwatershed. Formalizing the ditch to convey
stormwater east towards St. Vrain Creek would reduce the tributary area
contributing to the flooding hazards of Lyons Valley Park Subdivision.
If comingling of stormwater and irrigation flows is not desired an
overflow conveyance system intercepting the runoff from the upper
portions of the watershed could be built just downstream of South Ledge
Ditch. This conveyance system could be included as Lyons Valley Park
becomes fully developed.

#### 6.7.10 Ewald Ave - Corona Hill Diversion Ditch

As witnessed in the 1994 event, the Ewald Avenue Watershed poses a
significant flooding hazard to downstream properties within the
watershed. High velocity runoff flow off Corona Hill can carry debris
into the residential neighborhood. Intercepting the flow upstream of the
development and conveying the flow to the south would prevent debris
flow from impacting private properties. The diversion channel south of
the development would require significant energy dissipation to prevent
the discharge from reaching high velocities and eroding the hillside
south of the development. The steep slopes along the hillside would make
construction of any diversion channel difficult.

#### 6.7.11 Ewald Ave - Corona Hill Street Inlets

An alternative to intercepting flows upstream of the residential
development is formalizing street conveyance and installing storm drain
infrastructure along Prospect Road. The storm drain infrastructure in
combination with curb and gutter would confine the runoff from Corona
Hill to the street limiting the impact to private properties. Installing
additional inlets and laterals along the Park Street storm drain
alignment would encourage more water to be conveyed in the pipe as this
system is currently limited by the two inlets near 4th Avenue.