8.0 Capital Improvements Plan
=============================

A Capital Improvements Plan (CIP) in its most basic sense includes a
budget and a list of capital improvement projects. From those elements,
the CIP is aligned with priorities of the governing agency, permitting,
and construction logistics. This undoubtedly includes discussion
relative to other master plans, comprehensive plans, current events,
future plans, and historical performance. With priority projects
identified, the budget and requisite financing discussions move forward.
Internal and external funding sources are aligned with candidate
projects, perhaps influencing the relative priorities. Finally, the plan
is ratified and set forth in terms of planning, timing, and contracting.

This stormwater master plan prepares one element of a full Capital
Improvements Plan – the list of projects and anticipated costs. All
alternatives were evaluated during the master plan process, and cost
estimates for each alternative were part of that evaluation. An
engineer’s recommendation highlights the alternatives that have the
highest likelihood of implementation and therefore highest priority
within the comprehensive list of alternatives. The Town can take the
recommended alternatives and associated costs into further deliberations
with the Town staff, consultants, and advisors to determine the best
course of action. Essentially, this storm water master plan completes
the first phase of a stormwater CIP. But from this solid starting point,
the Town will be able to further evaluate the priority of stormwater
improvements relative to other municipal projects. And, then determine
how the essential stormwater needs can be funded and completed to
increase the resilience of the entire community to flood hazard damages.

Cost estimates for the alternatives described in Section 6 were
completed using the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District cost
estimating spreadsheets. These spreadsheets are routinely used to
evaluate the life cycle costs of stormwater infrastructure projects. The
cost estimates are comprehensive estimates including design,
construction and maintenance.

The appendix provides all supporting information for cost estimates and
rankings of selected alternatives. In summary, the recommended
stormwater improvements have a total life-cycle cost of $750M for the
Town of Lyons.