11.0 Conclusion
===============

There are several key concepts developed through the master plan study
of local stormwater in the Town of Lyons.

11.1 Hydrology
--------------

Since the 2013 Floods, there has been a number of studies on the
hydrology of major watersheds within the State and in particular along
the Front Range of Colorado. This study utilized the latest software and
methods to evaluate the basins immediately affecting the Town of Lyons.
Evaluations of the minor (2 year), intermediate, and major (100 year)
storms were completed. Analysis of the basins included a scenario for
wild fire, with consideration for the vegetation density and impact of
charred earth on stormwater runoff. This hydrologic analysis can be a
useful starting point for public and private studies of future
stormwater detention, capture, conveyance, as well as redevelopment of
Town of Lyons watersheds.

11.2 Land Use
-------------

The land use assumptions for this study determined the land use within
the 2016 Town boundary is effectively built out. In other words, when
comparing the existing impervious area with the impervious areas assumed
by the future land use maps, the increase is less than 10% of the
impervious area. Therefore, this study utilized the future land use
impervious area for hydrologic and hydraulic computations. This is a
unique, but not atypical, condition for a smaller front range community
with the topographic constraints of Lyons. Consequently, development or
redevelopment within the Town limits will not immediately invalidate the
conclusions of this master plan.

11.3 Detention
--------------

Detention is a valuable means of slowing down stormwater, storing it for
a short period of time, and releasing it in a controlled manner.
However, the steep slopes and land use constraints in the Town have
limited the feasibility of detention. Further evaluation of the
detention facilities contemplated in the previous (1998) master plan
identified several costly and complicated factors in the grading,
stability, and available storage volume. Consequently, this master plan
does not recommend significant benefit from detention facilities.
However, if the Town expands into the upper elevations on the north side
of Town development of new detention facilities should be recommended
and carefully designed.

11.4 Water Quality
------------------

Stormwater master plans are quick to identify the major storm water
risks and highlight the capital projects that can alleviate those risks.
The nature of benefit-cost financing decisions forces communities to
consider damages averted as a major element of the process. However,
there are incremental damages that are more difficult to quantify with
current technologies – water quality impairments for example. Therefore,
it is prudent to consider the means and methods by which a community can
improve water quality in the larger watersheds in which the community
resides. This master plan has identified a number of smaller, achievable
water quality improvements for the Town. The macro scale water quality
ponds that can record an official water quality capture volume are as
difficult to construct as the detention facilities on steep slopes in
essentially built-out communities. Therefore, this master plan considers
the greatest benefit to water quality will come through private,
small-scale water quality installations throughout an engaged and caring
community.

11.5 Public Outreach
--------------------

This master plan was scoped to focus on engineering analysis to
investigate the localized flood risk areas and evaluate mitigation
alternatives. The public process was coordinated with Town staff and
consultants and included presentations at the Utility and Engineering
Board, Board of Trustees, and meetings with concerned citizens and
neighbors. The public input to the process is essential in validating
the assumptions used to model the flood risks throughout areas of
complicated terrain, infrastructure, and changing ground conditions due
to flood recovery and construction projects. Given the dynamic nature of
flood recovery projects and the current economic environment, the public
outreach for this particular master plan must continue through at least
the planned completion of flood recovery projects in March 2018. At that
time, the regional projects and plans on the North and South St. Vrain
Rivers will be substantially completed. Evaluation and future
implementation of the stormwater master plan will be influenced by
completion of the major river projects. The online version of the master
includes a ‘click-to-comment’ function that allows users to add
stormwater master plan comments that get stored in a single database.
This commenting function, as well as the Town’s ongoing attention to
stormwater related matters, ensures this stormwater master plan has a
long shelf life.

11.6 Operation and Maintenance
------------------------------

Operation and maintenance is always a key element to any stormwater
plan. When the CIP projects reach nearly impossible budget figures, or
when the priorities for other municipal infrastructure out rank surface
drainage improvements, or when the best projects don’t get built for
another 10 years, the operation and maintenance of the existing system
continues. The Town’s existing stormwater system is functional despite
limited capacity and generally disconnected conveyance systems.
Therefore, resilience to flood risks can still improve even if it is
only maintenance activities on the existing system. Trash removal,
debris clean up, sediment removal, pipe maintenance, inlet cleaning,
gutter pan replacements, and other routine tasks are the preeminent
recommendation of the stormwater master plan.

11.7 Next Steps
---------------

The next steps for the Town of Lyons stormwater master plan include a
frequent and routine review of the projects, priorities, and plans set
forth in this document. This document in and of itself cannot solve a
stormwater problem, avert flood risk, or increase resilience in the
community. But, when this plan is paired with other planning efforts,
included in development discussions, use of the technical appendices in
evaluation of future projects, or other citations this plan can add
value and clarity to stormwater management discussions in the Town of
Lyons for many years to come.