5.0 Flood Hazard Area Mapping
=============================

5.1 Approach
------------

Two dimensional floodplain analysis.

5.2 Assumptions
---------------

The flood hazard area maps are non-regulatory, but identify structures
at risk of flood damage based on surface flow depths. The flooding
depicted on this map is a uniform storm event across all watersheds at
the same period of time and same duration.

Free flow. These depths do not account for debris or hail or other
impediments in storm water conveyance systems. Debris flow modeling is
possible, but is beyond the scope of this master plan study.

Storm sewer systems. Small diameter storm sewer systems were not
accounted for in the hydraulic modeling and resulting floodplain mapping
for this master plan study. The impact of a 4 or 8-inch or even 18-inch
culvert on flood depths is limited when considering storm events beyond
the 2 year recurrence interval. As a sensitivity analysis, the 18-inch
storm sewer pipes and inlets were accounted for in the Lyons Village
area. The resulting flood depths were unchanged for all but the 2 year
recurrence interval. In the 2 year recurrence interval storm, the flood
depths were reduced by approximately 3 inches. The floodplain mapping is
drawn as a quilt of interlocking 10 foot squares with depth averaged
across that area. There were less than 40 squares (4,000 square feet)
removed from flooding when accounting for the 18-inch storm sewer.

It is important to note, this is not a referendum on the existing
18-inch storm sewer system. Clearly, an 18-inch storm sewer conveys
water and a has a beneficial impact on the flood risk in the
neighborhood. This is a clear indication of the limitations of master
plan level, town wide, flood risk mapping. The uncertainty variables at
the master plan level results in floodplain maps depicting general,
conservative areas of risk. When areas such as developed neighborhoods
with existing storm sewer systems show up on the master plan flood maps
attention should be given to determine if a higher level of study is
necessary. In the case of Lyons Valley, the storm is functional and
clearly benefits the properties more than the master plan flood hazard
maps indicate. However, when combined with anecdotal stories about
spring and summer street flooding from overwhelmed inlets, this may be
an area to consider for additional detailed field survey and hydraulic
analysis.

5.3 Regulatory Floodplains
--------------------------

Conversion of these flood hazard areas to regulatory floodplains is a
complicated, long, but well documented process.
