10.0 Storm Water Utility
========================

This study evaluated the existing stormwater infrastructure and proposed
new stormwater infrastructure to mitigate flood risk. To improve
resiliency of the Town to flood disasters, there is an infrastructure
solution but that requires a significant capital investment. Grants,
joint projects, cost shares, and other large scale funding mechanisms
will be useful for making those improvements. But a regular funding
source for stormwater improvements is equally valuable. A stormwater fee
can offset the routine costs of operation and maintenance of stormwater
facilities that may otherwise be overlooked in the regular municipal
budgeting process. The fee is as much a reminder for proper care of the
existing infrastructure as it is a financial support to critical public
facilities.

Stormwater fees can be controversial. A stormwater fee supported by
defensible cost projections and allocated on a reasonable and controlled
metric can be less controversial than broad based uniform fees. Details
of a storm water utility implementation are beyond the scope of this
master plan. However, additional information is provided here to start
the conversation about implementing a mechanism to fund routine
stormwater maintenance and projects.

Stormwater fees exist in many communities along Colorado's front range,
some have been around for decades and others are more recently adopted.

10.1 What is a Stormwater Utility
---------------------------------

The basic concept of a stormwater utility is to charge property owners
for the amount of impervious area on their property in return for
providing construction and maintenance of a stormwater system.
Impervious area consists of manmade surfaces, which prevent the
infiltration of rainfall and snowmelt into the ground, and include;
buildings, driveways, parking lots, patios, commercial and industrial
roads, private roads, and other "hard" surfaces. It can be estimated
that runoff from these impervious surfaces increases 2 to 3 times from
what the runoff was when the parcel was undeveloped. In addition, the
water quality of the stormwater is worse than it was when the parcel was
undeveloped.

Most stormwater utilities therefore have a fee based on the amount of
impervious area on each parcel. This type of fee, if developed
correctly, has been upheld in the courts of Colorado as a legal fee.
Under the Tax Payers Bill of Rights (TABOR), a utility is termed an
enterprise and is allowed if its meets the TABOR definition of an
enterprise. Under this definition, an enterprise is a government owned
business (similar to a water or sewer utility), which derives 90% or
more of its revenue from non-governmental sources.

10.2 Stormwater Utility Fee Study Outline
-----------------------------------------

Phase A - Feasibility Study. A data collection and litmus test for
feasibility of the stormwater fee. This introduces the concept and
builds the project team of consultants, staff, legal representatives,
and engineers. This study results in a budget level estimate of fees
that could be generated from several alternative mechanisms. (i.e.
impervious area, rooftop area, lot size, etc.) The billing options are
usually a key driving factor in the decision for how the fee is
implemented. A town with existing billing systems for water and sewer
may be able to easily add on a stormwater fee to the existing invoicing
and collections systems. However, depending on billing systems or
operational constraints, a separate invoice may need to be developed
with its own schedule. These initial research results will then be
compared to adjacent communities and discussed amongst the project team
to determine a preferred approach. It is at this point the scope of the
fee will be identified and limitations on how the funds can be spent
will be drafted. This work should take between 3 and 4 months and not
require any legislative action.

Phase B – Preliminary Plan. The initial preferences are formalized into
a preliminary plan that can be presented to staff, councils, and the
general public for review and comment. A municipal and public process
can revise and adjust the fees, structure, and invoicing to fit the
needs of the administration and general public. This preliminary plan
will provide a more accurate estimate of impervious area or other
metrics selected to quantify the fee across various properties. A
selection of a rate structure and any classifications of properties
(i.e. private, public, non-profit, etc.) can be made at this stage.
Billing options will be finalized. And inherent to the more defined rate
structure will be a discussion on potential credits to the fee (i.e.
installation of rain barrels saves 10% of the fee per year, etc.). An
implementation cost for new software, systems, adjustment of existing
systems, or migration of existing processes can be estimated. This work
could take as long as 6 months and may require public hearings or other
administrative processes to document the public process.

Phase C – Implementation. This process finalizes the preliminary plan
and results in the delivery of the first stormwater fee invoices to the
community. Consequently, additional public outreach is necessary. Rate
classes are finalized for single family, multi family, commercial,
public, non-profit and other criteria. A financial outlook projecting
revenues and expenditures should be developed to support the final
adoption of the fee. Public works staff and consultants can be utilized
to prioritize stormwater utility routine tasks, annual procedures,
emergency operation allowances, and qualified special projects. A budget
for routine tasks may involve a monthly allocation for 12 hours of vac
truck time for stormwater inlet cleaning. An annual procedure may be an
inventory of outfall conditions town-wide. Emergency operation
allowances can be an agreement that specifies how much of the annual
stormwater fee budget is reserved for emergency repairs and operations.
A list of qualifications for special projects that can use the
stormwater fee can be developed to provide guidance for staff and
consultants to use when calls on the stormwater fee are made for repair,
rehabilitation or improvement of stormwater infrastructure. Before
presentation of the fee to the legislative process, a trial run of the
billing, time keeping, and tracking systems should be run. In some
cases, this can be a staged implementation where the fee is instituted
for public facilities at a trial rate of $1 per parcel. When those
systems are functional, the whole project can be presented to council
for adoption.

10.3 Use of Funds
-----------------

There can be specific study of how the funds are used. How the funds are
transferred within the Town's accounting system is important and
includes how the Town staff records their expenses related to
stormwater. The funds from a stormwater utility should be used primarily
for projects benefitting existing development because the existing
property owners pay the fees. New developers are expected to pay their
share of major drainage projects serving new development, because they
are responsible for the excess stormwater their development creates. New
developments are responsible for the minor drainage infrastructure
within their development such as street drainage systems, and minor
system pipes and channels conveying water to the major drainage
facilities.

10.4 Range of Nearby Stormwater Utility Fees
--------------------------------------------

The existing stormwater utilities in nearby communities can provide a
rough estimate for what a fee may be in Lyons. The range is from less
than $1 to more than $11. Berthoud has a fee of approximately $2.50 per
single family residential unit. Greeley, a much larger community, has a
fee of just over $5 per single family unit. Loveland has a fee over $11
and has been in existence since the early 1980s. In general, the average
around the front range of Colorado is about $5 per single family
residential unit. However, the average can be misleading as the
variables for how the fee is paid, used, and allocated changes for every
community, land use, and sometimes by year.