9.0 System Maintenance
======================

There are three primary components to system maintenance that can
maximize the capacity and function of the existing, and proposed, storm
sewer systems. Schedule, equipment, and monitoring are three of the key
elements to operation and maintenance of a stormwater system.

The schedule of maintenance operations is a function of unpredictable
storm events and routine dry-weather maintenance activities. A standard
operating procedure for municipal work crews will include a schedule
identifying which storm sewer systems get maintained at which time. At a
minimum, every storm sewer inlet and outfall within Town right-of-way or
open space property should be cleaned, patched, sealed, or otherwise
maintained once a year. Although sediment and debris removal is the most
common maintenance activity, patching of exposed reinforcing steel,
clearing inlet grate frames to ease removal, mastic sealing joints at
asphalt/concrete, sealing pipe joints, or tightening clamps holding
flared end sections can all be effective, routine maintenance
activities.

The equipment used in maintenance operations can be a significant
initial cost, but ultimately reduce manpower requirements. Given the
Town’s variety of storm sewer inlet grates, pipe sizes, and culvert
dimensions the equipment must be flexible and manage a variety of debris
conditions. Fortunately, most of the Town’s stormwater infrastructure is
accessible from Town right-of-way. Therefore, a vacuum truck is a likely
candidate for use in maintenance operations. Whether the truck is owned,
leased, or rented for the year, month, or days of stormwater
infrastructure maintenance is a decision for budgeting and policy.
However, the ability to lift a grate, insert a flexible nozzle of
varying size, and hydro-excavate the debris and sediment from the system
is an effective means of clearing the system, increasing capacity, and
extending the life of the components. The material is captured in an
on-board tank and disposed at an in-town stockpile for processing or an
offsite dump. Other equipment can be either too large to effectively
clear the inlets and pipes (i.e. backhoe, skidsteer); or too small to
complete the job in an efficient manner (i.e. handheld shovels and
picks).

Monitoring the system becomes a preventative maintenance activity.
Observation of the storm sewer system during small rain events, fire
hydrant testing, or snow melt events can identify blockages or pipe
failures before large spring storms cause bigger problems. Observation
of the inlet systems can become part of a staff or consultant
responsibility or become a down-time task for maintenance staff. The
existing system inventory completed for this master plan includes photos
of every element of the system as of the Summer of 2016. The database of
photos can be helpful in determining the rate of deterioration,
sedimentation, or failure since that benchmark time.

Other activities can be important to a System Maintenance program, but
schedule, equipment, and monitoring cover the key aspects of sustaining
the existing storm sewer system. A good maintenance program increases
the overall resilience of the system through knowledge of the system
limitations and tendencies. When large spring storm events clog the
system with hail and leaf debris, maintenance staff with experience
maintaining the system over time can quickly clear choke points with
effective equipment and understand the impact on the system.