7.0 Water Quality Improvements
==============================

Comprehensive stormwater management includes a wide variety of rainfall
scenarios from exceedingly rare peak flow events to statistically
average events to brief afternoon rain showers. The best plans
acknowledge all phases of stormwater management and provide benefits
throughout the watershed and throughout the range of recurrence
intervals.

Constraints to this approach are clearly financial, the major capital
improvement projects are expensive and the minor water quality BMPs can
become costly pieces of infrastructure to maintain in working order.
However, there are localized water quality improvements that can be
implemented in certain watersheds in specific communities. These smaller
scale projects fit within smaller towns well because a reasonable
implementation density (i.e. participation percentage) is within reach
of public-private partnerships.

Other larger scale water quality projects are just as important to the
overall stream health. Larger ponds integrated into public spaces are a
typical method of capturing a large water quality volume. Ordinances
that require water quality implementation for new and redevelopment can
be equally important. (See Appendix X for examples.)

7.1 Small Scale Water Quality Improvements
------------------------------------------

#### 7.1.1 Tree Wells

#### 7.1.2 Rain Gardens

#### 7.1.3 Rainwater Harvesting

7.2 Large Scale Water Quality Improvements
------------------------------------------

#### 7.2.1 North St. Vrain Water Quality Pond

#### 7.2.2 Streambank Wetlands

#### 7.2.3 Pervious Pavers

7.3 Outfall Water Quality
-------------------------
